Projects! (#179)
val-town/val-town-blog: src/content/blog/projects.mdx

---
title: Introducing Projects

> description: Projects are containers for vals, files, and folders to increase the scope of what you can build in Val Town

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Increase the scope of what you can build in Val Town with Projects.
```

Nit, but suggesting that we present the benefit for the user before we explain what the thing is. We care that we are launching projects. Users care that they can increase scope of what they're building

pubDate: January 29, 2025
author: Steve Krouse
---

import { Image } from "astro:assets";
import ProjectsExample from "./Projects/Project.png";
import ValExample from "./Projects/Val.png";
import DateMe from "./Projects/DateMe.png";

<figure>
  <Image
    src={ProjectsExample}
    alt="Young Street Toronto, ,
    a blog & newsletter project"
  />
  <figcaption>
    [Young Street Toronto](https://www.val.town/x/vawogbemi/yongeStreetToronto),
    a blog & newsletter project by [Victor](https://www.val.town/u/vawogbemi)
  </figcaption>
</figure>

> Today we're releasing **Val Town Projects** in public beta. Projects are containers for vals, files, and folders that are versioned collectively, and deployed on Val Town. Where a Val Town Val is like a GitHub Gist, a Val Town Project is like a GitHub Repo. {/* Dan Levine doesn't like this analogy; maybe remove it? */} Projects dramatically increase the scope of what you can build in Val Town.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, we're releasing Val Town Projects in public beta. Projects unlock a whole new level of complexity and scalability for what you can build in Val Town. Projects are containers for vals, files, and folders that are versioned collectively, and deployed on Val Town.
```

^ I don't know if I love `whole new level of complexity and scalability` but leaving as a suggestion to see if we can more concretely point to what "increased scope" means

## Vals are too small

> Projects solve the biggest problem with Val Town: vals are too small. A vals is just a single file. It's incredible what you all have been able to do with them, but they become unwieldy after a thousand lines or so. This pain is especially acute when you're using an LLM that is trying to edit or rewrite hundreds or thousands of lines in a single file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Projects solve the biggest problem with Val Town: it was impossible to scale with Val Town. A val is just a single file. It's incredible what you all have been able to do with them, but they become unwieldy after a thousand lines or so. This pain is especially acute when you're using an LLM that is trying to edit or rewrite hundreds or thousands of lines in a single file.
```

> Projects solve the biggest problem with Val Town: vals are too small. A vals is just a single file. It's incredible what you all have been able to do with them, but they become unwieldy after a thousand lines or so. This pain is especially acute when you're using an LLM that is trying to edit or rewrite hundreds or thousands of lines in a single file.

Reviewer: I'm thinking something along the lines of:

> You shouldn’t have been able to build an entire personal CRM, or [insert other massive user built val, maybe Nate's?] with a single file. Yet, you did. You chained vals together, hacked around import limitations, and manually stitched together forks and updates to keep things running. Most users either stuffed all their code into a single super long val, just made all their changes directly to their main production vals (sometimes breaking it briefly), or moved off Val Town entirely.

And then we would get rid of the entire next paragraph

<figure>
  <Image src={ValExample} alt="Val Example" />
  <figcaption>
    [A Personal CRM](https://www.val.town/v/juecd/CRM) by [Catherine
    Jue](https://www.val.town/u/juecd) - built mostly by Townie AI, but became
    unwieldy after a thousand lines
  </figcaption>
</figure>

You can break up a single val into multiple vals that import each other, but
that becomes untenable quickly. For example, say you have a couple of vals
running in production that you want to make a medium-sized change to. If you
don't want to affect production while you work, you'd have to fork each of those
vals manually. Then you'd have to manually update all the imports in each of

> those vals to point to the forked versions. Then when you're ready to merge back

Reviewer: ```suggestion
those vals to point to the forked versions. When you're ready to merge back
```

to main, you'd have to manually update all the imports again. This is no fun.
Instead most users either stuffed all their code into a single super long val,

> just made all their changes directly to their main production vals (somtimes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
just made all their changes directly to their main production vals (sometimes
```

breaking it briefly), or moved off Val Town entirely.

<figure>
  <Image src={DateMe} alt="Val Example" />
  <figcaption>
    [Date Me Directory](https://val.town/v/stevekrouse/dateme) - an alternative
    dating website that became an unwieldy collection of vals with many
    disorganized forks
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Clearly we needed a solution to dramatically increase the scope of what you can build on Val Town.

## Enter Projects

> Projects are containers for multiple vals, files, and folders that are versioned, branched, forked, and merged back collectively. Projects support incredibly powerful workflows, such as the desired feature branch workflow described above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Projects, you can create feature branches and test changes without affecting production.
```

> Projects are containers for multiple vals, files, and folders that are versioned, branched, forked, and merged back collectively. Projects support incredibly powerful workflows, such as the desired feature branch workflow described above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Projects are containers for multiple vals, files, and folders that are versioned, branched, forked, and merged back collectively. With Projects, you can create feature branches and test changes without affecting production.
```
```

- **Readmes are version controlled** – unlike in vals, readmes in Projects are just files, and version controlled collectively with the rest of the Project
- **Inline AI code completion** – powered by [Codeium](https://codeium.com)
- **Full-screen Editor** - with a file-tree, logs, and browser preview

## Coming soon

Projects will soon support:

- Resolving merge conflicts
- Beta API for Projects
- Townie, or [some other sort of AI assistance](./fast-follow/)
- Reverting to a previous version
- Previewing past versions
- Protecting (locking) the main branch (so you can only edit it via branches)
- Images and videos, and other binary static files
- Pull requests from other user's to your Project
- Collaborators & Team Accounts
- ...and much, much more! Let us know what you want to see next!

## Resources

If you get stuck, please reach out in [our Discord](https://discord.gg/dHv45uN5RY), or email us directly (help@val.town), and include a link to your project. We're here to help!

## Start building today

You can start building with Projects today by creating a new Project via the blue `New` button in the top right in your [Val Town account](https://val.town/).

> We can't wait to see what you build!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is what Val Town was meant to be. We can't wait to see what you build! 
```

However, as described above, just because you're deploying to the cloud on every save doesn't mean you want to deploy to _production_ on every save. Feature branches in projects give you the best of both worlds: you can rapidly prototype in the exact same environment that you'll deploy to, but without affecting production. It's like localhost and PR previews had a baby: super fast iteration cycles, paired with hosted URLs you can immediately share.

And the final kicker is scale. Our vision is that once your app is running on Val Town, it's deployed. You don't have to worry about provisioning more or less compute. Our serverless platform will automatically scale your app to handle any number of users. (Our Scale Plan is slated to launch in Q2 2025. For now, Val Town scales to 100k and 1m runs per day on [the Free and Pro plans](https://www.val.town/pricing), respectively.)

## Projects are not git repos

We considered building Projects as git repos. We decided that becoming a git host at scale was too much complexity for the small subset of git's features that we wanted (diffs, branches, merges). We realized that it'd be much simpler to build our own version control system.

> This sounds like sacrilege – even to us. Everyone at Val Town is aa happy git and GitHub user. Yet if you think about it, many any of the web's pro tools had to build their own version control, including Google Docs, Figma, and Notion. We feel very heartened to read about how speculative and uncertain this decision felt at Figma to build their own multiplayer system instead of using OTs (operational transforms), which was the standard at the time given its success in Google Docs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This sounds like sacrilege – even to us. Everyone at Val Town is a happy git and GitHub user. Yet if you think about it, many any of the web's pro tools had to build their own version control, including Google Docs, Figma, and Notion. We feel very heartened to read about how speculative and uncertain this decision felt at Figma to build their own multiplayer system instead of using OTs (operational transforms), which was the standard at the time given its success in Google Docs.
```

But just because you're deploying to the _cloud_ on every save doesn't mean you want to deploy to _production_ on every save. Val Town Project branches give you the best of both worlds: you can rapidly prototype in the exact same environment that you'll deploy to, but without affecting production. It's like localhost and PR previews had a baby: super fast iteration cycles, paired with immediately hosted URLs you can share.

And the final kicker is scale. Our vision is that once your app is running on Val Town, it's fully deployed and you can rest easy. You don't have to worry about provisioning more or less compute. Our serverless platform will automatically scale your app to handle any number of users. (Our Scale Plan is slated to launch in Q2 2025. For now, Val Town scales to 100k and 1m runs per day on [the Free and Pro plans](https://www.val.town/pricing), respectively.)

## Projects are not git repos

> We considered building Projects as git repos, but decided that becoming a git host at scale was too much complexity for the small subset of git's features that we wanted (diffs, branches, merges). We realized that it'd be much simpler to build our own version control system.

Reviewer 2: This feels quite punchy. I guess this is technically true, but I think in my head it's more like "we built a small subset of the features of a version control system in order to avoid building or maintaining our own version control system". maybe I am splitting hairs
